Fundamental Rights (Articles 12-35) 
Enshrined in Part-III of the Indian Constitution, Fundamental Rights are the basic human rights 
guaranteed by the Constitution of India. The six fundamental rights include the Right to 
Equality, Right to freedom, Right against exploitation, Right to freedom of Religion, Cultural 
and Educational Rights and Right to constitutional Remedies. 
Originally Right to property (Article 31) was also included in the Fundamental Rights. 
However, by the 44th Constitutional Amendment Act, 1978, it was deleted from the list of 
Fundamental Rights and made a legal right under Article 300A in Part XII of the constitution. 
Fundamental Rights in India (Article 12-35) 
The development of Fundamental Rights in India is heavily inspired by the United States Bill 
of Rights. These rights are included in the constitution because they are considered essential 
for the development of the personality of every individual and to preserve human dignity. 
Fundamental Rights are included in Part-III of the Indian constitution which is also known as 
the Magna Carta of the Indian Constitution. 
These rights are called fundamental rights because they are justiciable in nature allowing 
persons to move the courts for their enforcement, if and when they are violated 
Features of The Fundamental Rights 
Some of the salient features of Fundamental Rights include: 
Fundamental Rights are protected and guaranteed by the constitution. 
Fundamental Rights are NOT sacrosanct or absolute: in the sense that the parliament can curtail 
them or put reasonable restrictions for a fixed period of time. However, the court has the power 
to review the reasonability of the restrictions. 
Fundamental Rights are justiciable: The constitution allows the person to move directly to the 
Surpreme Court for the reinforcement of his fundamental right as and when they are violated 
or restricted. 
Suspension of Fundamental Rights: All the Fundamental Rights are suspended during National 
Emergencies except the rights guaranteed under Articles 20 and 21. 
Restriction of Fundamental Rights: The Fundamental Rights can be restricted during military 
rule in any particular area. 
Important Articles Related To Fundamental Rights 
Let us now look at some of the important articles related to the Fundamental Rights in India: 
Article 12: Defines The State 
Article 12 of the Indian Constitution defines The State as: 
The Government and Parliament of India, 

The Government and legislatures of the states, 
All local authorities and 
Other authorities in India or under the control of the Government of India. 
Article 13: Defines Laws Inconsistent with or In derogation of 
Fundamental Rights 
Article 13 of the Indian Constitution states that: 
All laws in force in the territory of India immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution, in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall, to the 
extent of such inconsistency, be void. 
The State shall not make any law which takes away or abridges the rights conferred by this Part 
and any law made in contravention of this clause shall, to the extent of the contravention, be 
void. 
In this article, unless the context otherwise required, – (a) “law” includes any Ordinance, order, 
bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force 
of law; (b)“laws in force” includes laws passed or made by a Legislature or other competent 
authority in the territory of India before the commencement of this Constitution and not 
previously repealed, notwithstanding that any such law or any part thereof may not be then in 
operation either at all or in particular areas. 
Nothing in this article shall apply to any amendment of this Constitution made under article 
368. 
Classification of Fundamental Rights 
The fundamental rights are classified into the following six categories: 
Classification 
of 
Fundamental Rights 
Article Deals With 
Right to Equality 
14 
Equality Before Law 
15 
Prohibition of Discrimination 
16 
Equality of Opportunity in Public Employment 
17 
Abolition of Untouchability 
18 
Abolition of Titles 

Right to Freedom 
19 
Protection of 6 Rights 
Right to freedom of speech and expression. 
Right to assemble peaceably and without arms. 
Right to form associations or unions or co-operative societies. 
Right to move freely throughout the territory of India. 
Right to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India. 
Right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, 
trade or business. 
20 
Protection in Respect of Conviction for Offences 
21 
Protection of Life and Personal Liberty
 
21-A 
Right to Education 
22 
Protection Against Arrest and Detention 
Right 
Against 
Exploitation 
23 
Prohibition of Human Trafficking and Forced Labour 
24 
Prohibition of Child Labour 
Right to Freedom of 
Religion 
25 
Freedom of Conscience, Profession, Practice and Propagation 
26 
Freedom to Manage Religious Affairs 
27 
Freedom from Taxation for Promotion of a Religion 
28 
Freedom from Attending Religious Instruction 
Educational 
and 
Cultural Rights 
29 
Protection of Interests of Minorities 
30 
Right of Minorities to Establish and Administer Educational 
Institutions 
32 
Right to remedies for the enforcement of the fundamental 
rights using five writs: 

Right 
to 
Constitutional 
Remedies 
Habeas Corpus - to direct the release of a person detained 
unlawfully. 
Mandamus - to direct a public authority to do its duty. 
Quo Warranto - to direct a person to vacate an office assumed 
wrongfully. 
Prohibition - to prohibit a lower court from proceeding on a 
case. 
Certiorari - the power of the higher court to remove a 
proceeding from a lower court and bring it before itself. 
33 
Empowers the Parliament to restrict or abrogate the 
fundamental rights of the ‘Members of the Armed Forces, 
paramilitary forces, police forces, intelligence agencies and 
analogous forces 
34 
Provides for the restrictions on fundamental rights while 
martial law (military rule) is in force 
35 
Empowers the Parliament to make laws on Fundamental 
Rights 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fundamental Duties 
42nd Amendment Act of 1976 added 10 Fundamental Duties to the Indian Constitution. 86th 
Amendment Act 2002 later added 11th Fundamental Duty to the list. Swaran Singh Committee 
in 1976 recommended Fundamental Duties, the necessity of which was felt during the internal 
emergency of 1975-77. 
The Fundamental Duties are dealt with Article 51A under Part-IV A of the Indian Constitution.  
The fundamental duties which were added by the 42nd Amendment Act of the Constitution in 
1976, in addition to creating and promoting culture, also strengthen the hands of the legislature 
in enforcing these duties vis-a-vis the fundamental rights. 
The list of 11 Fundamental Duties under article 51-A to be obeyed by every Indian citizen is 
given in the table below: 
S.No 
11 Fundamental Duties 
1. 
Abide by the Indian Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National 
Flag and the National Anthem 
2. 
Cherish and follow the noble ideals that inspired the national struggle for freedom 
3. 
 Uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India 
4. 
Defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so 
5. 
Promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India 
transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities and to renounce 
practices derogatory to the dignity of women 
6. 
Value and preserve the rich heritage of the country’s composite culture 
7. 
Protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wildlife 
and to have compassion for living creatures 
8. 
 Develop scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform 
9. 
Safeguard public property and to abjure violence 

10. 
Strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the 
nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement 
11. 
 Provide opportunities for education to his child or ward between the age of six and 
fourteen years. This duty was added by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act, 2002 
 

